> We seem to have this async code with loops and stuff to control going from sync to async
methods, or the other way around. Can you explain to me why this is necessary? Why can't all of
 our methods, for example, be sync? dont change just explain

â— The async/sync mixing in this codebase exists because of two conflicting requirements:

  The Core Tension

  1. HTTP/Network I/O wants to be async

  The Anthropic API client, aiohttp for web requests, and FastAPI's SSE streaming all work best
   with async. Async lets you:
  - Make multiple HTTP requests concurrently without threads
  - Stream responses without blocking
  - Handle many concurrent users efficiently

  2. The tool executor interface is sync

  Your tools are designed with a simple sync signature:
  def executor(params, db, user_id, context) -> ToolResult

  This makes tools easy to write - no async def, no await, just regular Python.

  Why Not Make Everything Sync?

  You could make everything sync, but you'd lose significant benefits:

  1. Concurrent searches would require threads: In _execute_searches, you run 3 queries. With
  async, these could run concurrently with asyncio.gather(). With sync, you'd need
  ThreadPoolExecutor or run them sequentially (slower).
  2. SSE streaming would block: FastAPI's StreamingResponse works naturally with async
  generators. Sync would require more complex threading.
  3. The Anthropic client is async-first: While there's a sync client, the async one integrates
   better with FastAPI.

  Why Not Make Everything Async?

  You could make all tools async, but:

  1. Tool authors need to understand async: Every tool would need async def and proper await
  usage
  2. Database sessions get tricky: SQLAlchemy sessions aren't naturally async (SQLAlchemy 2.0
  has async, but it's more complex)
  3. Simple tools become verbose: A tool that just formats data would still need async
  boilerplate

  The Bridge Pattern You're Using

  The asyncio.to_thread() calls are the bridge:

  # In async context, run sync tool in a thread pool
  result = await asyncio.to_thread(tool_config.executor, ...)

  And the reverse in tools:
  # In sync tool, run async search
  loop = asyncio.new_event_loop()
  result = loop.run_until_complete(search_service.search(...))
  loop.close()

  This is a pragmatic compromise - async at the service layer (where concurrency matters), sync
   at the tool layer (where simplicity matters).

  The Ugly Part

  The new_event_loop() pattern in tools like execute_web_search and _execute_searches is indeed
   awkward. It's creating/destroying event loops repeatedly, which is inefficient. A cleaner
  approach would be:

  1. Make SearchService.search() have a sync wrapper, or
  2. Pass an event loop through context, or
  3. Use a single background event loop for all sync-to-async calls

  But those add complexity. The current approach works, just with some overhead.